OTEP: Stable by Default (#4813)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: oteps/4813-stable-by-default.md

Semantic convention changes destroy existing dashboards. When conventions change, users must update instrumentation across their entire infrastructure while simultaneously updating dashboards, alerts, and downstream tooling. Organizations report significant resistance from developers asked to coordinate these changes.

Many instrumentation libraries are stuck on pre-release because they depend on experimental semantic conventions, even when the instrumentation API surface itself is mature and battle-tested. The "batteries not included" philosophy means users must assemble many components before achieving basic functionality. Documentation assumes expertise, and newcomers describe the experience as "overwhelming" with "no discoverability." Auto-instrumentation can add significant resource consumption that only becomes apparent at scale, with reports of "four times the CPU usage" compared to simpler alternatives. Users evaluating OpenTelemetry for production deployment need confidence in CVE response timelines, dependency hygiene, and supply chain security—areas where commitments are not well documented.

> These all stem from the same problem: OpenTelemetry's default configuration prioritizes feature completeness over production readiness. This OTEP establishes the goals and workstreams needed to address this.

Reviewer: To adapt a snowclone I'm sure we all see frequently these days: it's not just stability, it's reliability.  And scalability, adaptability, extensibility, configurability, etc.  All of the quality attributes we want our software and systems to have.

## Goals

This OTEP aims to achieve six outcomes:

> - Users should be able to trust default installations. Someone who installs an OpenTelemetry SDK, agent, or Collector distribution without additional configuration should receive production-ready functionality that will not break between minor versions.

Reviewer: I think this also highlights something that's often implicit in how the collector SIG operates, and potentially others.  There is an understanding that, regardless what major version is attached to our releases, many users have deployed production systems that rely on what we deliver and expect some level of stability.  Indeed, the Collector's [coding guidelines](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines.md#breaking-changes) specify how to make compatibility-breaking changes in ways that minimize the likelihood of disruption to users.

# Stable by Default: Improving OpenTelemetry's Default User Experience

> This OTEP defines goals and acceptance criteria for making OpenTelemetry production-ready by default. It identifies workstreams requiring dedicated effort and coordination across SIGs, each of which may spawn follow-up OTEPs with detailed designs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This OTEP defines goals for making OpenTelemetry production-ready by default. It identifies workstreams requiring dedicated effort and coordination across SIGs, each of which may spawn follow-up OTEPs with detailed designs.
```

## Motivation

OpenTelemetry has grown into a massive ecosystem supporting four telemetry signals across a dozen programming languages. This growth has come with complexity that creates real barriers to production adoption.

> Community feedback consistently identifies several pain points. Experimental features break production deployments—users report configuration breaking between minor versions, silent failures in telemetry pipelines, and unexpected performance regressions that only appear at scale.

Reviewer: > attempt to provide a single global standard that we can hold SIGs to

Didn't we do that five years ago [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/versioning-and-stability.md)?  The only reference to that document I see is buried at the end in the `Prior Art` section.  What does this OTEP propose needs to change from that document?  What is working and should be retained?

More generally, I'm not sure we're all talking about the same thing here.  @pellared seems to be saying "some things are experimental and that's normal and expected" while @austinlparker seems to be saying "too many things are experimental and users are confused about what is and isn't stable, particularly across SIG boundaries that may be transparent to them".  I can empathize with that position, having several times heard "OTel breaks things too often" that, on further probing, boils down to "<language> SDK/instrumentation doesn't adhere to (my understanding of) semconv" or "I haven't updated this v0.x component for 35 minor revisions and am surprised something broke".  I'm not sure I would describe those situations as a lack of stability or that they would be addressed by what's proposed here.

> Semantic convention changes destroy existing dashboards. When conventions change, users must update instrumentation across their entire infrastructure while simultaneously updating dashboards, alerts, and downstream tooling. Organizations report significant resistance from developers asked to coordinate these changes.

Reviewer: If these changes are that disruptive and important why would we consider instrumentation that uses unstable semantic conventions to be stable?  Simply saying those components should bump their major version every time their underlying conventions break isn't a complete answer.  It doesn't address the fact that giving a 1.x version to a library that knows it will be making "breaking" changes frequently gives only the appearance of stability and not actual stability, nor does it address the challenges inherent in some language ecosystems regarding the management of multiple major versions of the same library.

> Many instrumentation libraries are stuck on pre-release because they depend on experimental semantic conventions, even when the instrumentation API surface itself is mature and battle-tested. The "batteries not included" philosophy means users must assemble many components before achieving basic functionality. Documentation assumes expertise, and newcomers describe the experience as "overwhelming" with "no discoverability." Auto-instrumentation can add significant resource consumption that only becomes apparent at scale. Users evaluating OpenTelemetry for production deployment need confidence in CVE response timelines, dependency hygiene, and supply chain security—areas where commitments are not well documented.

Reviewer: I'm not sure where "stability" relates to any of these statements except perhaps the first sentence, which is followed by several _non sequitur_ statements.

These all stem from the same problem: OpenTelemetry's default configuration prioritizes feature completeness over production readiness. This OTEP establishes the goals and workstreams needed to address this.

## Goals

This OTEP aims to achieve six outcomes:

> - Users should be able to trust default installations. Someone who installs an OpenTelemetry SDK, agent, or Collector distribution without additional configuration should receive production-ready functionality that will not break between minor versions.

Reviewer: What is a "default installation" in this context?  Does this apply to every artifact produced by any SIG?  I think between "[s]omeone who installs [some software] without additional configuration should receive production-ready functionality that will not break between minor versions" and the OTEP title "Stable by Default" there is little room left for the development process.  If we cannot have v0.x software that can break between minor versions how are we to develop new software?  Should we expect that all components are developed elsewhere and donated to OTel only once they're "stable"?  That seems unreasonable to me.

- Experimental features should be clearly marked and require explicit opt-in. Users who want cutting-edge functionality can access it, but they must take deliberate action that signals they understand the stability trade-offs.

> - Stability information should be visible and consistent. Users should be able to easily determine the stability status of any component before adopting it, and this information should be presented consistently across all OpenTelemetry projects.

Reviewer: Does v0.x versioning and inclusion in a `go.mod` or `project.json` or `cargo.toml` satisfy these requirements?  What about standalone binaries released with a v0.x version?  If so, I'm not sure what changes would arise from the inclusion of these goals as we're already there.  If not, I'm not sure how much more explicit we can be and I think these statement need to be much clearer about what they're trying to achieve and what mechanisms would be satisfactory.

> - Instrumentation should be able to stabilize based on production readiness. The bar for a stable instrumentation library should be whether the instrumentation code itself is production-ready, not whether the semantic conventions it depends on have been finalized. However, once an instrumentation library stabilizes, any breaking change to its telemetry output must be treated as a breaking change requiring a major version bump. This stability guarantee applies to telemetry that the instrumentation library itself produces. When an instrumentation library subscribes to telemetry emitted natively by a third-party library (e.g., auto-instrumentation that captures spans produced by an HTTP client's own OTel integration), the content of that telemetry is governed by the third-party library's release cycle, not the instrumentation library's stability contract.

Reviewer: > The bar for a stable instrumentation library should be whether the instrumentation code itself is production-ready, not whether the semantic conventions it depends on have been finalized. However, once an instrumentation library stabilizes, any breaking change to its telemetry output must be treated as a breaking change requiring a major version bump.

I read this as "you can be stable with unstable dependencies, but every time they break you have to bump your MV", which is not at all stable.  It's simultaneously saying too much and too little.  What if the code is production ready but the authors aren't sure that the configuration interface is correct and want more feedback?  What if the code has been used in production in many cases but has a known issue and the most likely solutions to that known issue involve breaking API changes?  I think it's not a simple boolean function on a binary input of `(production_ready, semconv_stable)`.

- Performance characteristics should be known. Users should be able to understand the overhead implications of OpenTelemetry before deploying to production, and maintainers should be able to detect regressions between releases.

> - Security commitments should be documented. Users should be able to evaluate OpenTelemetry's security posture, including CVE response timelines and dependency management practices.

Reviewer 3: I think that it is already considered by the security sig and should not impact stability guarantees.

## Success Criteria

> This initiative succeeds when official OpenTelemetry distributions—Collector distributions, the Java agent, and similar—enable only stable components by default. Users should be able to enable experimental features through a consistent, well-documented mechanism. Each component's stability status should be clearly documented and discoverable. Instrumentation libraries should be able to reach stable status based on the production readiness of their code, even if the semantic conventions they depend on are still evolving. Once stable, any breaking change to telemetry output requires a major version bump. Performance benchmarks should exist for stable components, with published baseline characteristics. Security policies and CVE response commitments should be documented and followed.

Reviewer: > This initiative succeeds when official OpenTelemetry distributions—Collector distributions, the Java agent, and similar—enable only stable components by default.

Does this mean that the `collector-contrib` distribution must be eliminated?  Do we really have a reasonable expectation that it can both ship only "stable" components and meet its goal of including "all the components from both the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) repository and the [OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib) repository"?

> Users should be able to enable experimental features through a consistent, well-documented mechanism. 

Like [this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/builder)?

> Each component's stability status should be clearly documented and discoverable.

Like [this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/receiver/otlpreceiver/metadata.yaml)? Or [this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/versions.yaml)?  Or [this](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/collector/component#StabilityLevel)?

## Workstreams

Achieving these goals requires coordinated effort across multiple areas. Each workstream below represents a body of work that may require its own detailed OTEP, tooling, or process changes. The current recommendations are just that -- it's probable that separate projects may need to be created to focus on these specific workstreams.

### Workstream 1: Experimental Feature Opt-In

There is no consistent mechanism across OpenTelemetry for users to opt into experimental features. The Collector uses feature gates, some SDKs use environment variables like `OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN`, and others have ad-hoc approaches. Users have no reliable way to know what they are opting into or what the stability implications are.

> This workstream should result in a consistent pattern for experimental feature opt-in that works across SDKs, the Collector, and instrumentation libraries.

Reviewer: Is this even a feasible goal?  The collector can use feature gates with CLI flags because it is itself a standalone application that is in control of its process lifecycle.  SDKs and instrumentation libraries should absolutely not be adding CLI flags to control feature gates even if it is possible as they're not in control of the process that contains them and could cause any number of unintended consequences that would be significantly worse than having applications configured one way and libraries configured another.

> This workstream should result in a consistent pattern for experimental feature opt-in that works across SDKs, the Collector, and instrumentation libraries.

Reviewer 4: I have a proposal in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/issues/4534#issue-4384677933

I think an environment variable like `OTEL_PYTHON_MINIMUM_STABILITY_LEVEL` or more general `OTEL_MINIMUM_STABILITY_LEVEL` is a good option to allow users to specify the minimum stability level to opt-in for features in Collector, SDK, and instrumentation agents.

A new project will be needed to drive this work.

### Workstream 2: Federated Schema and Stability

> Instrumentation libraries are blocked from stabilization because they depend on experimental semantic conventions, even when the instrumentation code itself is mature and battle-tested. There is also no consistent mechanism to declare which semantic conventions an instrumentation uses or to report schema URLs consistently.

Reviewer 3: The statement that we do not have consistent way to emit information about semantic convention is not true.
It is not emitted everywhere, but it is different topic that stating that it is not consistent mechanism to utilize it.

> This workstream should establish a path for instrumentation libraries to stabilize based on the production readiness of their code, rather than requiring all upstream semantic conventions to be stable first. Once stable, instrumentation libraries own the stability of their full output—any breaking change to emitted telemetry must be treated as a breaking change requiring a major version bump, regardless of whether the change originates from updated semantic conventions or from the instrumentation itself. The workstream should also address how instrumentation communicates its semantic convention dependencies to users and downstream tooling, and how migration works when conventions evolve after instrumentation has stabilized.

Reviewer: Can we reasonably do this without a mechanism for migrating telemetry produced under one version of the conventions to another?  If nothing changes about an instrumentation library but the version of the semantic conventions it uses to emit telemetry why should that instrumentation library have to undergo multiple major version bumps?  Nothing about the library itself would change in a way that would cause compilation failures.  This also does nothing to address the inconsistency that would result from some applications updating to the next major version of an instrumentation library while others remain behind.  That would seem to require schema migration capabilities to reconcile those inconsistencies and, once those are in place, changing the telemetry emitted by an instrumentation library no longer seems like a breaking change worth incrementing the major version.

The Semantic Conventions SIG and Weaver maintainers are the natural owners. Related work includes the [OTEP on federated semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4815).

### Workstream 3: Distribution and Component Definitions

The term "component" means different things in different contexts—a Collector receiver is quite different from an SDK plugin or an instrumentation library. There is no clear definition of what criteria a component must meet to be included in an official distribution, or what "official distribution" even means.

This workstream needs to define what a component is, what an official distribution is, and what criteria govern inclusion in distributions. The definitions need to work across the Collector, SDKs, and instrumentation.

The GC and Technical Committee should own this work.

### Workstream 4: Production Readiness Criteria

> Users cannot easily assess whether a component is ready for production use. Stability status alone does not convey documentation quality, performance characteristics, or operational readiness.

Reviewer: This seems to acknowledge the difference between "stability" and "production readiness" that seems to be conflated elsewhere.  If API stability or configuration stability or telemetry stability don't mean that something is "ready for production use" why should something being deemed so ready be the gate for calling it "stable"?

This workstream should address how users understand performance overhead and how maintainers detect regressions. Benchmarks will take different forms depending on the component.

Each implementation SIG should own this work with coordination from the TC.

### Workstream 6: Security Standards

Users evaluating OpenTelemetry for production need confidence in security practices, but commitments around CVE response timelines, dependency updates, and supply chain security are not well documented.

This workstream should result in documented, consistent security commitments across OpenTelemetry projects.

The Security SIG, GC, and TC should own this work.

## Impact

### On Existing Distributions

Distributions that currently enable experimental components by default will need to audit their component list and develop a migration plan. To avoid breaking existing users, implementations may provide a transitional period with deprecation warnings before changing defaults. The specifics of this transition are left to individual distributions and the workstreams above.

### On Instrumentation Libraries

> Instrumentation library maintainers will be able to stabilize based on the production readiness of their code, without waiting for all upstream semantic conventions to stabilize. Once stable, they own the stability of their telemetry output—any breaking change to emitted telemetry requires a major version bump. They will need to clearly document which semantic conventions they use and provide migration guidance when conventions evolve.

Reviewer: > They will need to clearly document which semantic conventions they use and provide migration guidance when conventions evolve.

Is this not implicitly saying "some of what this component does is not stable, despite its version and stability level"?

### On Users

Users will experience a more predictable default installation. Those who depend on experimental features will need to explicitly opt in, which may require configuration changes during the transition period.

## Trade-offs

Disabling experimental features by default means users get less functionality out of the box, which could worsen the "batteries not included" perception. The workstreams above will need to account for this.

Defining workstreams and requiring cross-SIG coordination may slow progress compared to individual SIGs acting independently. However, each workstream can proceed independently once acceptance criteria are agreed. This OTEP provides alignment on goals without requiring lockstep execution.

> Allowing instrumentation to stabilize before its upstream semantic conventions may confuse users who see "stable" instrumentation emitting telemetry based on "experimental" semantic conventions. However, this does not mean telemetry output is free to change without consequence—once stable, the instrumentation library commits to the telemetry it emits, and any breaking change requires a major version bump. How to communicate this to users is something the workstreams will need to sort out. The alternative — keeping production-ready instrumentation in pre-release indefinitely — is worse.

Reviewer: Is there a problem with instrumentation authors keeping otherwise stable instrumentation libraries at v0.x because the semconv are not stable and then using that semconv status as justification for making breaking API changes that otherwise wouldn't justify the effort of maintaining a new MV?  If so, that's not explicit anywhere in here and I'm left trying to read between the lines for why the repeated insistence that semconv stability shouldn't gate component stability but component stability is still broken by unstable semconvs changing.

## Open Questions

Who will own each workstream? Should ownership be assigned before this OTEP is approved, or can workstreams proceed as volunteers emerge?

Can workstreams proceed in parallel, or do some depend on others? For example, does "Distribution and Component Definitions" need to complete before "Experimental Feature Opt-In" can finalize its design?

Should the default be "stable only" or "beta and above"? The Collector and Kubernetes enable beta features by default. Is that the right model for OpenTelemetry broadly?

Which distributions are considered "official" and subject to these requirements? Just the Collector distributions and Java agent? What about language-specific SDK packages?

How do we ensure workstream outcomes are adopted across the federated OpenTelemetry project? What enforcement mechanisms exist beyond social pressure?

How will we measure whether this initiative is successful? User surveys? Reduced support burden? Faster adoption?

## Future Possibilities

> Once the workstreams defined in this OTEP complete, several additional improvements become possible. Users could specify minimum stability thresholds—for example, "only enable beta or above components"—through configuration files or environment variables. Tooling could automatically assess and surface stability information such as documentation completeness, benchmark availability, and test coverage to help users and maintainers. Mechanisms for coordinating stability status across language implementations would ensure users have consistent expectations regardless of language choice. Decoupling instrumentation stability from semantic conventions enables domain experts outside core OpenTelemetry to develop and stabilize conventions for their domains.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I see how any of these things are not possible with the current policies, structures, and tools we have today.  Many of them will require significant development effort, for sure, but that doesn't change when we start shipping new major versions every month.  In fact, it probably gets worse.

### Workstream 1: Experimental Feature Opt-In

There is no consistent mechanism across OpenTelemetry for users to opt into experimental features. The Collector uses feature gates, some SDKs use environment variables like `OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN`, and others have ad-hoc approaches. This workstream should define a consistent pattern for experimental feature opt-in that works across SDKs, the Collector, and instrumentation libraries.

The work is complete when we have a documented mechanism for enabling experimental features—whether through environment variables, configuration, or programmatic API—along with clear guidance on what "experimental" means and what users are opting into. Experimental features should be disabled by default with clear logging when enabled. Where possible, the design should align with existing patterns like Collector feature gates and `OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN`.

> The Configuration SIG is the natural owner for this work.

Reviewer 5: The config SIG was initialized as a [project](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/projects/config.md) with a particular scope, and as such is planning on shutting down upon stabilizing the specification. It can recharter / restart, but with different goals and potentially different people.

### Workstream 2: Federated Schema and Stability

> Instrumentation libraries are blocked from stabilization because they depend on experimental semantic conventions, even when the instrumentation code itself is mature. There is also no standard way to declare which semantic conventions an instrumentation uses or to report schema URLs consistently.

Reviewer 6: > "There is also no standard way to declare which semantic conventions an instrumentation uses or to report schema URLs consistently"

I do disagree with how this is phrased.  I would argue that OpenTelemetry has not adopted its own standard and tooling here, so we're going to improve it.

The End User SIG and Communications SIG should own this work.

### Workstream 5: Performance Benchmarking

Users report unexpected performance overhead with OpenTelemetry, sometimes discovering issues only at scale. Maintainers lack consistent tooling to detect performance regressions.

This workstream should establish patterns and tooling for performance benchmarking that give users visibility into overhead and maintainers ability to detect regressions. We need guidance on benchmark approaches—microbenchmarks, integration benchmarks, memory profiling—along with recommended tooling or frameworks that maintainers can adopt, examples of effective benchmark suites from existing projects, and historical tracking patterns to detect regressions over time.

Benchmarks will take various forms depending on the component, and the specific approach should be left to maintainers. That said, stable components should have some published benchmark suite that runs consistently.

> Per-language SIGs should own this work with coordination from the TC.

Reviewer 7: Sorry to be the "what about the Collector" guy but what about the Collector (or other implementation SIGs that are not language SIGs)? Maybe

```suggestion
Each implementation SIG should own this work with coordination from the TC.
```

# Stable by Default: Improving OpenTelemetry's Default User Experience

> This OTEP proposes that OpenTelemetry distributions enable only stable components by default, decouple instrumentation stability from semantic convention stability, and establish expanded stability criteria that include documentation, performance benchmarks, and practical usability.

Reviewer 8: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/distributions/

From the above doc, this OTEP is mostly applicable to Collector and Java agent, which are the only distributions OTel owns/manages. Other distributions are vendor maintained..

**Experimental features break production deployments.** Users report configuration breaking between minor versions, silent failures in telemetry pipelines, and unexpected performance regressions that only appear at scale. As one practitioner noted: "The silent failure policy of OTEL makes flames shoot out of the top of my head."

**Semantic convention changes destroy existing dashboards.** When semantic conventions change, users must update instrumentation across their entire infrastructure while simultaneously updating dashboards, alerts, and downstream tooling. Organizations report significant resistance from developers asked to coordinate these changes.

**Instrumentation libraries are stuck on pre-release.** Many instrumentation libraries cannot reach stable status because they depend on experimental semantic conventions, even when the instrumentation API surface itself is mature and battle-tested.

> **Defaults are not useful out of the box.** The "batteries not included" philosophy means users must assemble many components before achieving basic functionality. Documentation assumes expertise, and newcomers describe the experience as "overwhelming" with "no discoverability."

Reviewer 9: I have this proposal might make the "batteries not included" situation even worse. There are probably lots of components out there that many people want to use that are not "stable" and this proposal now will make it more difficult for them to reach such status because it expands the requirements to do so.

**Performance overhead surprises users.** Auto-instrumentation can add significant resource consumption that only becomes apparent at scale, with reports of "four times the CPU usage" compared to simpler alternatives.

These issues share a common root cause: OpenTelemetry's default configuration prioritizes feature completeness over production readiness. This OTEP addresses that by making stability the default.

## Explanation

> ### Principle: Stable by Default

Reviewer 7: I think it could be useful to compare the current wording with [the wording on the VERSIONING.md doc from the opentelemetry-collector repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/VERSIONING.md#general-considerations):

> * Users can easily understand when they are opting in to use a component or feature that is not stable.
>   * The Collector MUST be configurable so that unstable components or features can be excluded ensuring that a fully stable configuration is possible.
>   * The Collector's telemetry (e.g. Collector logs) MUST provide the ability to identify usage of unstable components or features.

Should we take anything from the Collector and add it here?

> All OpenTelemetry distributions SHOULD enable only stable components by default. Users who want experimental features MUST explicitly opt in through a consistent, well-documented mechanism.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
All stable OpenTelemetry distributions SHOULD enable only stable components by default. Users who want experimental features MUST explicitly opt in through a consistent, well-documented mechanism.
```

3. **No silent experimental dependencies.** Stable components MUST NOT silently depend on experimental components in a way that could break user deployments.

### Decoupling Instrumentation Stability from Semantic Convention Stability

An instrumentation library's stability status SHOULD be independent of the stability status of the semantic conventions it emits.

**Rationale:** Instrumentation libraries have two surfaces that can be evaluated independently:

1. **API surface** - The programmatic interface developers use (method signatures, configuration options, lifecycle hooks)
2. **Telemetry output** - The semantic conventions used in emitted spans, metrics, and logs

If an instrumentation library's API surface is stable, mature, and well-tested, blocking its stabilization on experimental semantic conventions harms users by:

- Keeping useful, production-ready code in a "pre-release" state indefinitely
- Preventing distributions from including battle-tested instrumentation by default
- Creating a false signal that the instrumentation is immature when only the conventions are evolving

> **Migration pathway requirement:** When instrumentation libraries stabilize before their semantic conventions, they MUST document:

Reviewer 10: they MUST also follow SemVer when they update semconv versions the follow, i.e. major-version-bump if they start emitting new incompatible semconv version by default

I.e. we should document that breaking telemetry is also a breaking change

- Which semantic conventions are currently experimental
- How telemetry output may change when conventions stabilize
- Recommended approaches for handling convention migrations (e.g., dual-emission, schema transformations)

> 

Reviewer 10: Let's require instrumentations to report actual SchemaURL that includes version. 
This would help with all above, plus will be available over OTLP. 

This proposal https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4815 would also make stable/experimental status obvious

   - Historical tracking to detect regressions over time

   Note: The goal of benchmarking is **visibility, not gatekeeping**. We acknowledge that instrumentation adds overhead—we are not promising zero-cost observability. What we need is:
   - **Knowledge**: Users should be able to understand what overhead to expect in typical scenarios before deploying
   - **Tracking**: Maintainers should be able to detect performance regressions between releases
   - **Improvement path**: Contributors who care about performance should have benchmarks they can optimize against

   Benchmarks may take various forms depending on the component: microbenchmarks for hot paths, integration benchmarks for end-to-end scenarios, or memory profiling for allocation-heavy components. The specific approach is left to maintainers, but stable components SHOULD have *some* published benchmark suite that runs consistently.

3. **Tested integration points**
   - Verified compatibility with common frameworks and libraries
   - Example configurations for popular deployment patterns
   - Known limitations clearly documented

4. **Operational readiness**
   - Health check and diagnostic capabilities

>    - Graceful degradation under resource pressure

Reviewer 11: IMHO "Health check" & "Graceful degradation" are good chunks of effort (proportional to the number of instrumented libraries). Ideally guidelines or general concepts should be written down so different SIGs instrumentation can follow them rather than have each invent its own.

I wouldn't be opposed to leave this one out and do a follow up (OTEP or issue). Not a strong opinion on this though.

   - Clear feedback mechanisms (no silent failures)

### Promoting Instrumentation to Distributions

> Instrumentation libraries that meet stability criteria SHOULD be promoted into official distributions when:

Reviewer 7: Does this cover also Collector components? What does it mean for something to be "promoted into" an official distribution? For it to be available by default?

1. The instrumentation API surface is stable
2. The instrumentation covers a widely-used framework or library
3. The instrumentation has demonstrated production usage
4. The semantic conventions used are either:
   - Stable, OR

>    - Experimental but with a documented migration pathway

Reviewer 10: assuming instrumentations just follow semver (and major-version bump when change telemetry in breaking way), this point is not necessary

This enables distributions to provide useful functionality by default while maintaining clear communication about what stability guarantees apply to different aspects of the telemetry.

### Consistent Opt-In Mechanism

> All OpenTelemetry implementations SHOULD provide a consistent mechanism for opting into experimental features:

Reviewer 7: Is this meant to be an "all of the following mechanisms are cool" or an "any of the following mechanisms are cool"

> 1. **Environment variable:** `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_FEATURES_ENABLED=feature1,feature2` or `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_FEATURES_ENABLED=all`

Reviewer 10: does it mean that a distro would depend on unstable instrumentations and just keep them off? and then enable them if configured so? 

It seems to be conflicting with 

> 3. **No silent experimental dependencies.** 

and I think should be clarified. Depending on unstable lib in stable distro might still be somewhat problematic.

> 1. **Environment variable:** `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_FEATURES_ENABLED=feature1,feature2` or `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_FEATURES_ENABLED=all`

Reviewer 7: This is not how the Collector works, instead relying on feature gates. Is the proposal that the Collector would stop using feature gates as a mechanism?

2. **Programmatic configuration:** A clearly-named API for enabling experimental features at initialization time

3. **Configuration file:** A dedicated section for experimental feature flags

The mechanism SHOULD:

- Be consistent across all language implementations
- Produce clear log messages when experimental features are enabled
- Be discoverable through documentation and error messages

## Internal details

### Impact on Existing Distributions

Distributions that currently enable experimental components by default will need to:

1. Audit which components are experimental vs. stable
2. Move experimental components behind opt-in flags

> 3. Update documentation to explain how to enable experimental features

Reviewer 7: General comment: let's use the [OTEP 232 maturity levels](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/oteps/0232-maturity-of-otel.md#maturity-levels) instead of using "experimental" or "unstable" which is ambiguous

4. Communicate changes to users with appropriate migration guidance

**Rollout consideration:** To avoid breaking existing users, implementations MAY provide a transitional period where:

- A deprecation warning is emitted when experimental features are used without explicit opt-in
- The default behavior changes to stable-only in a subsequent release

### Impact on Instrumentation Libraries

Instrumentation library maintainers will need to:

1. Clearly document which semantic conventions they use and their stability status

> 2. Implement migration pathways for convention changes (e.g., dual-emission periods)

Reviewer 10: See my other comment - in addition to/instead of documentation, let's ask to populate SchemaURL (not a requirement today and not really followed).

We can centrally document migration pathways we follow in semconv (we did it for HTTP, DB, now doing for RPC) - we don't need every library to come up with their own, we can generalize central ones and ask them to follow.

3. Meet expanded stability criteria before being included in default distributions

### Unified Component Metadata

OpenTelemetry currently has fragmented metadata approaches: semantic conventions use Weaver's YAML schema with stability fields, the Collector has `metadata.yaml` for components, and instrumentation libraries have no standardized format. This OTEP proposes a unified component metadata schema that works across all OpenTelemetry components.

Every OpenTelemetry component (instrumentation library, Collector component, SDK plugin) SHOULD include a `metadata.yaml` file with a consistent schema:

```yaml

> # metadata.yaml - Unified OpenTelemetry Component Metadata

Reviewer 12: We should describe which fields are required and what is optional.

type: instrumentation  # instrumentation | receiver | processor | exporter | extension

status:
  # API/programmatic interface stability (method signatures, config options)
  api:
    stability: stable  # development | alpha | beta | release_candidate | stable

  # Telemetry output stability, per-signal
  telemetry:
    traces: stable
    metrics: beta

>     logs: development

Reviewer 10: I don't think it's practical or possible to differentiate by signal or even have it as a static property. 

Instrumentation libs have a set of stable features and some experimental ones. It's not a static property of the lib, but dynamic the property of telemetry that depends on the config. It should come from schemaUrl (that is also dynamic - http://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.38.0 for stable and http://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.38.0-dev for unstable)
